---
layout: post
title: Passwords
category: blog
comments_id: 7
---

I got a new phone, hurrah!  As part of the set up I had to
reauthenticate a bunch of apps.  While that mostly that went well,
Uber made it annoying.

For that app, you set your phone number and they send you a text with
a PIN to validate.  But during the time they app swapped out the
'enter pin' dialog to a 'enter password' one, as they'd foudn my
existing login.  That's confusing, and of course I pasted the pin
before being rejected and noticing it was asking a different question.
I either typoed or misremembered my password, not sure.  But as that
didn't work, I clicked the 'forgot password' link to get a reset email.

The reset email takes you to the usual 'enter new password' dialog.
That failed with the extremely annoying 'you've entered a previous
password'.  *Don't do that* all that is indicating is that I've now
remembered my password, please let me use it.  Don't force me to think
up a new (more forgettable?) password.  If you're really worried about
me resetting to a maybe compromised password, maybe just tell me and
add a 'confirm' button?

Anyway, did that, reauthenticated with the app and it still wanted to
send a text.  Android's now smart enough to extract the PIN and offer
to copy it to the clipboard.  But the Uber app *disables* the
clipboard.  You have to actually look at the text and manually type
the pin.  (This is unlike all the other apps that did this and were
quite happy with cut-n-paste.)

All in all, Uber managed to make an annoying but necessary task
extremly frustrating.  Bad app, no biscuit!
