---
layout: post
title: CMake
category: blog
comments_id: 8
---

I played with CMake, and I liked it.

I've used `autoconf` & `make` for like 30 years.  I write makefiles
that generate makefiles.  The trouble is that make projects in general
are not composeable -- you have to treat each subproject as a separate
make invocation, so no make has a complete graph of the dependencies.
Thus a toplevel `make`, will *always* recurse into the subprojects,
even when everythings up to date.

I created some projects with composeable makefiles.  That required
some rigourous design, and it worked to have a single make build
everything.  One of the constraints is that each subcomponent had to
prefix variables with a unique identifier, as there are no namespaces
here.  But these projects are not composable with other people's
projects, because everyone has their own way of composing (or not)
makefiles.  In fact I ended up jettisoning all the smarts when
incorporating one of those projects elsewhere.  So, um, what's the
point?

Then there's `autoconf`.  That allows you to script various checks and
probes, but it attempts to provide a shell-agnostic meta-layer to
write all this stuff in.  Often configure scripts don't rigidly use
that and drop into shell fragments all the time.  Also, getting the
right level of m4 quoting can be very tricky too.

I thought I'd learn a new tool -- CMake seems to be popular, let's
see what it's all about!

I converted one of my projects to `cmake`.  As there is an accepted
structure as to how to layout and compose CMake projects, there were
rails to ride.  That helped enormously.  That was successful, I ended
up with les configurey goup than before, plus I new how to break out
the subproject that got converted along the way.

Flushed with that, I addressed the next project.  This one had a
Domain Specific Languages<sup>[1](#foot1)</sup>, which meant generated
headers.  That was tricky, but I did get `cmake ` to DTRT.  This
process reduced about 750 lines of `autoconf`, `configure`, `make` to
around 250 lines of CMake.

Of course, being the 2nd CMakification I got a few things wrong, and
after a month reorganized things to be even better.

I'm pretty convinced by CMake.  It didn't take too long to get the
hang of it, and it did cope with the generated header problem I had.

- CMake is a single imperative language.  `autoconf` & `make` is at
  least 3 languages (M4, Shell, Make) with an abstracton layer
  (autoconf) on top of it.  Plus imperativeness is relaxed --
  `configure.ac` gets reordered by `autoconf` into `configure`, and
  `make` has two phases of variable expansion.

- Autoconf requires shell discipline to be portable -- oh, I'm sorry
  that's a bit of non-portable $fancyshell you accidentally used.  A
  user trips over it and weirdness occurs.

- CMake's rather odd 'everything's a function' syntax can be a bit
  disorienting.  The most missed feature is the ability to *easily*
  prepend or append to elements of a list.

- Autoconf works with cross builds, IIUC CMake can do that too, but it
  is tricky.  I have no experience with cmake cross-building.  And to
  do proper cross building one needs very careful configure.ac and
  Makefile.in construction.

Coda: The first make I used was so poorly documented, that I ended up
writing my own scanner for C file inclusion and using that for the
project I was working on -- it was simpler to write my own tools as I
learnt how to write C!

<a name="foot1">1</a>: *Of course it did*, I play with compilers all the time.